Add EIP: Multi-edition NFT Distribution (#7853)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-7536.md

---
eip: 7536
title: Multi-edition NFT Distribution
description: A specification on the distribution of multiple editions of child NFTs with different rules and privileges.
author: Henry Yeung (@henrywfyeung) <henry@didhub.com>, Xiaoba <xiaoba@didhub.com>
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-idea-multi-edition-nft-distribution/16092
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2023-10-15
requires: 165, 721
---

## Abstract

> This standard is an extension of [ERC-721](./eip-721.md), which enables any ERC-721 compliant tokens, to conditionally permit the minting of various editions of child tokens with specific privileges attached.
> 
> Edition is defined as a version of child tokens that encapsulates a descriptor to the parent, the address to a validator that validates rules before minting the child token, and a set of actions that can be invoked upon obtaining the child token.
> 
> Each parent token can create multiple editions, each with a different set of rules to obtain the child tokens, and with different levels of privileges attached in the form of permitted actions.
> 
> Upon fulfilling the corresponding rules from a specific edition, one can obtain the child token and will be able to use the token within the boundaries set by the parent token holder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This standard extends [ERC-721](./eip-721.md) to enable conditional minting of various editions of child tokens with specific privileges attached. An edition is defined as a version of a child token that encapsulates a descriptor to the parent, the address to a validator that validates rules before minting the child token, and a set of actions that can be invoked upon obtaining the child token. Each parent token can create multiple editions, each with a different set of rules to obtain the child tokens, and with different levels of privileges attached in the form of permitted actions. Upon fulfilling the corresponding rules from a specific edition, one can obtain the child token and will be able to use the token within the boundaries set by the parent token holder.
```

> ![Parent Child and Edition Relationship Diagram](../assets/eip-7536/assets/edition.png)

Reviewer: Does not belong in Abstract. Abstracts should be text-only.

## Motivation

Most community-based relationships can be regarded as a social structure with a community owner, and multiple tiers of community members. Each tier has its own cost and benefit of joining. This can apply to the Profile-Follower relationship, Creation-Collection relationship, Producer-Subscriber relationship, Dao-Member relationship, etc.

> 
> This standard gives the interfaces for implementing such a tiered system. It empowers any ERC-721 tokens with the ability to create editions of child tokens that give privileges at a cost.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This is implied

## Specification

The key words “MUST”, “MUST NOT”, “REQUIRED”, “SHALL”, “SHALL NOT”, “SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “RECOMMENDED”, “MAY”, and “OPTIONAL” in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

> This standard consists of a Distributor Interface and a Validator Interface. The Distributor interface MUST be implemented by a [ERC-721](./eip-721.md) compliant contract that enables the minting of child tokens. This contract SHOULD enable any ERC-721 compliant parent token to create editions. The editions SHOULD consist of an address to a contract that implements the Validator Interface, which helps to validate the rules to mint the child token. It SHOULD also record the contract address and the tokenId of the parent token, and a set of permitted actions in the form of uint96 flags. An ERC-721-compliant contract MAY implement both the Distributor Interface and the Validator Interface, or implement only the Distributor Interface and use external contracts that implement the Validator Interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This is established in the interfaces themselves

### The Distributor Interface

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```solidity
```

pragma solidity >=0.8.0 <0.9.0;

/**
 * @notice The Distributor interface dictates how the holder of any ERC-721 compliant tokens (parent token) 
 * can create editions that collectors can conditionally mint child tokens from. Parent token holder can 
 * use the setEdition to specify the condition for minting an edition of the parent token. An edition is 
 * defined by the contractAddress and tokenId to the parent token, the address of the validator contract that specifies
 *  the rules to obtain the child token, the actions that is allowed after obtaining the token.
 *   

>  * A Collector can mint a child token of an Edition given that the rules specified by the Validator are 
>  * fulfilled.
>  *
>  * Parent tokens holder can set multiple different editions, each with different set of rules, and a 
>  * different set of actions that the token holder will be empowered with after the minting of the token.
>  */
> interface IDistributor {
> 
>     /**
>      * @dev Emitted when a nedition is created
>      * 
>      * @param editionHash The hash of the edition configuration
>      * @param tokenContract The token contract of the NFT descriptor
>      * @param tokenId The token id of the NFT descriptor
>      * @param validator The address of the validator contract
>      * @param actions The functions in the descriptor contract that will be permitted.
>      */
>     event SetEdition(bytes32 editionHash, address tokenContract, uint256 tokenId, address validator, uint96 actions);
>     
>     /**
>      * @dev Emitted when an edition is paused
>      * 
>      * @param editionHash The hash of the edition configuration
>      * @param isPaused The state of the edition
>      */
>     event PauseEdition(bytes32 editionHash, bool isPaused);
> 
>     /**
>      * @dev The parent token holder can set an edition that enables others
>      * to mint child tokens given that they fulfil the given rules
>      *
>      * @param tokenContract the token contract of the Parent token
>      * @param tokenId the token id of the Parent token
>      * @param validator the address of the validator contract
>      * @param actions the functions in the descriptor contract that will be permitted.
>      * @param initData the data to be input into the validator contract for seting up the rules
>      * it can also be used to encode more parameters for the edition
>      * 
>      * @return editionHash Returns the hash of the edition conifiguration 
>      */
>     function setEdition(
>         address tokenContract,
>         uint256 tokenId,
>         address validator,
>         uint96  actions,
>         bytes calldata initData
>     ) external returns (bytes32 editionHash);
>     
>     /**
>      * @dev The parent token holder can pause the edition
>      *
>      * @param editionHash the hash of the edition
>      * @param isPaused the state of the edition
>      */ 
>     function pauseEdition(
>         bytes32 editionHash,
>         bool isPaused
>     ) external;
> 
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pragma solidity >=0.8.0 <0.9.0;

/**
 * @notice This interface enables an [ERC-721](./eip-721.md) compliant contract to mint child tokens. A contract implementing this interface SHOULD allow any ERC-721 compliant parent token to create editions. Each edition SHOULD contain an address to a contract implementing the Validator Interface for validating minting rules, record the contract address and the tokenId of the parent token, and specify a set of permissible actions via uint96 flags.
 */
interface IDistributor {

    /**
     * @dev Emitted when a new edition is created.
     * @param editionHash The hash of the edition configuration.
     * @param tokenContract The token contract of the NFT descriptor.
     * @param tokenId The token id of the NFT descriptor.
     * @param validator The address of the validator contract.
     * @param actions The permitted functions in the descriptor contract.
     */
    event SetEdition(bytes32 editionHash, address tokenContract, uint256 tokenId, address validator, uint96 actions);
    
    /**
     * @dev Emitted when an edition is paused or resumed.
     * @param editionHash The hash of the edition configuration.
     * @param isPaused The state of the edition.
     */
    event PauseEdition(bytes32 editionHash, bool isPaused);

    /**
     * @dev Allows the parent token holder to set an edition, enabling others to mint child tokens given certain conditions.
     * @param tokenContract The token contract of the Parent token.
     * @param tokenId The token id of the Parent token.
     * @param validator The address of the validator contract.
     * @param actions The permitted functions in the descriptor contract.
     * @param initData Data input into the validator contract for setting up rules; may encode additional edition parameters.
     * @return editionHash Returns the hash of the edition configuration.
     */
    function setEdition(
        address tokenContract,
        uint256 tokenId,
        address validator,
        uint96  actions,
        bytes calldata initData
    ) external returns (bytes32 editionHash);
    
    /**
     * @dev Allows the parent token holder to pause or resume an edition.
     * @param editionHash The hash of the edition.
     * @param isPaused The state of the edition.
     */ 
    function pauseEdition(
        bytes32 editionHash,
        bool isPaused
    ) external;
}
```
Copyedited

```

### The Validator Interface

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```solidity
```

> pragma solidity >=0.8.0 <0.9.0;
> 
> /**
>  * @notice This is the validator interface. It specifies the rules that needs to be fulfilled, and enforce the
>  * fulfillment of these rules. The parent token holder is required to first register these rules onto a particular
>  * edition, identified by the hash of the edition configuration (editionHash). When a collector wants to mint from
>  * the edition, the collector will need to pass the validation by successfully calling the validate function.  
>  * 
>  * In the validation process, the collector will need to supply the basic information including initiator
>  * (the address of the collector), editionHash, and some optional fullfilmentData.
>  */
> interface IValidator {
> 
>     /**
>      * @dev Sets up the validator rules by the edition hash and the data for initialisation. This function will
>      * decode the data back to the required parameters and sets up the rules that decides who can or cannot
>      * mint a copy of the edition.
>      *
>      * @param editionHash The hash of the edition configuration
>      * @param initData The data bytes for initialising the validation rules. Parameters are encoded into bytes
>      */
>     function setRules(
>         bytes32 editionHash, 
>         bytes calldata initData
>     ) external;
>     
>     /**
>      * @dev Supply the data that will be used to validate the fulfilment of the rules setup by the parent token holder.
>      *
>      * @param initiator the party who initiate vadiation
>      * @param editionHash the hash of the edition configuration
>      * @param conditionType the type of condition to validation
>      * @param fullfilmentData the addtion data that is required for passing the validator rules
>      */
>     function validate(
>         address initiator, 
>         bytes32 editionHash,
>         uint256 conditionType,
>         bytes calldata fullfilmentData
>     ) external payable;
> 
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pragma solidity >=0.8.0 <0.9.0;

/**
 * @notice The Validator Interface defines rules for minting child tokens. The parent token holder registers these rules for a specific edition, identified by the edition configuration hash (editionHash). Collectors wishing to mint a child token from this edition must pass validation by successfully calling the validate function, supplying necessary information including initiator address, editionHash, and optional fulfillment data.
 */
interface IValidator {

    /**
     * @dev Initializes validator rules using the edition hash and initialization data. Decodes the data to required parameters, establishing the rules determining who can mint a copy of the edition.
     * @param editionHash The hash of the edition configuration.
     * @param initData The data bytes for initializing validation rules; parameters are encoded into bytes.
     */
    function setRules(
        bytes32 editionHash, 
        bytes calldata initData
    ) external;
    
    /**
     * @dev Validates the fulfillment of rules set by the parent token holder, using supplied data.
     * @param initiator The party initiating validation.
     * @param editionHash The hash of the edition configuration.
     * @param conditionType The type of condition for validation.
     * @param fulfillmentData Additional data required for passing validator rules.
     */
    function validate(
        address initiator, 
        bytes32 editionHash,
        uint256 conditionType,
        bytes calldata fulfillmentData
    ) external payable;

}
```
Copyedited

```

> ### Usage
> 
> Any ERC-721 token can use the Distributor Interface to create multiple editions, each with a different set of rules to be validated by the Validator Interface before obtaining a child token, and the set of actions that can be invoked after obtaining the child token. This is very useful in community building, and has a diverse range of use cases, for instance:
> 
> - Copy Issuance of Unique Artwork/Content: Artists create unique artworks. There could be multiple collectors who want to keep a copy of their artworks. This standard serves as a tool to issue multiple copies of the same kind. The copies can be created with different functions and under different rules. It gives sufficient flexibility to both the Creator and the Collector.
> - Partial Copyright Transfer: This standard enables Creators to conditionally delegate different levels of copyrights, i.e. the right to produce derivative work, to the Collectors. There is no need to sell the original copy, i.e. creator token, in the market. The Creator can instead keep the token as proof of authorship, and the key to managing copy issuance.
> 
> People with the following use cases can consider applying this standard:
> 
> - Creators of any unique Art/Music NFTs can use this standard to sell copies to audiences. With this standard, they can retain some control over the copies.
> - Artists can use this standard to sell time-limited copies of their artwork to other artists with a copyright statement that enables the production of derivative work
> - Universities can create Graduation Certificates as NFTs and use this standard to mint a batch of non-transferable issues to their students. The Univerity retains the right to revoke any issued certificates, through action.
> 
> ## Rationale

Reviewer: Usage belongs more in Rationale than Spec, and the wording can be significantly improved

```suggestion
## Rationale

### Usage

The Distributor Interface enables any ERC-721 token to create multiple editions, each with distinct rules validated by the Validator Interface before minting a child token, and a set of actions available post-minting. This is advantageous for community building, with diverse use cases like:

- **Copy Issuance of Unique Artwork/Content:** Artists can issue multiple copies of their unique artworks with different functions and rules, providing flexibility to both creators and collectors.
- **Partial Copyright Transfer:** Creators can conditionally delegate varying levels of copyrights, allowing for derivative work production without selling the original copy.

Consider using this standard for:

- Selling copies of unique Art/Music NFTs while retaining control over the copies.
- Selling time-limited copies of artwork with attached copyright statements for derivative work production.
- Issuing non-transferable Graduation Certificates as NFTs, where the university retains the revocation right.
```
